---
title: "Aristotle's Tragedy in Shakespeare"
date: "2024-05-05"
tags: ["essay", "literature", "Medieval", "Shakespeare"]
---


<b>Tragic Flaws and Lethal Heroes: Othello and Macbeth under Aristotle’s Definition</b>

The tragic hero has remained one of the most compelling figures in literature, captivating audiences across centuries through stories of downfall and internal struggle. Central to understanding this archetype is Aristotle’s Poetics, a foundational text that outlines the defining characteristics of tragedy and the heroes who inhabit such stories. While interpretations have evolved over time, Aristotle’s insights provide a valuable lens through which to examine dramatic literature, particularly in relation to Shakespearean tragedy. By revisiting the philosopher’s criteria for tragedy we can better grasp the complexities of tragic heroes like Othello and Macbeth. The characters of Othello and Macbeth closely align with the Aristotelian model of the tragic hero through their noble stature, fatal flaws, and eventual downfalls that evoke pity and fear.

To discuss tragic heroes, one must first ask what a tragedy is. Aristotle’s definition of tragedy is frequently referenced by English scholars to address this issue; however, it is complex and contains some ambiguity that should be clarified. Aristotle’s opening line in his definition makes clear what a tragedy entails: “Tragedy, then, is an imitation of an action that is serious, complete, and of a certain magnitude” (Aristotle VI). It is stated that a tragedy in any form of fiction must reflect a serious and powerful reality, ensuring the story can carry the weight of the action it is built upon. The phrase "of a certain magnitude" refers to the impressive power the subject should convey, whether it be death or love, which can be intuitively grasped by the audience and is significant enough for the author to explore its themes deeply. Aristotle continues by stating, “In language embellished with each kind of artistic ornament, the several kinds being found in separate parts of the play; in the form of action, not of narrative,” underscoring the necessity of dramatizing the tragedy to maintain the artistic merit of the writer and the flourish that should characterize great writing, according to Aristotle. Throughout Poetics, he emphasizes the importance of action in tragedy. Tragedy should be rooted in the actions of its characters, rather than conveyed through exposition or a narrator, allowing the audience to perceive a cause-and-effect dynamic between the characters and the story. Aristotle concludes his definition by stating, “Through pity and fear effecting the proper purgation of these emotions,” which speaks to the tragedy's goal: evoking feelings of pity and fear. This aligns with the general definition of art as something that elicits emotions in its audience. More critically for Aristotle, however, these emotions serve as a means for the characters to reflect on themselves and their actions by the story's conclusion. The idea is that as a character navigates the story and the “tragedy” unfolds, they will come to understand their own fears and pitiful circumstances, thus empowering themselves to rise from this low point. All these elements must be examined alongside the tragic plays of Shakespeare, such as Othello and Macbeth, to better comprehend the tragic genre. Although Shakespeare may not have read Aristotle's Poetics directly, these theories were undeniably influential on Elizabethan culture, and his plays suggest his familiarity with Aristotelian notions of tragedy.

We can use Aristotle’s definition of tragedy as a guide to compare both the plays and titular characters of Othello and Macbeth to deepen our understanding of what constitutes a tragedy. For a quick recap of each: Othello tells the story of a black soldier in Venice who becomes a victim of deceit and manipulation after he surpasses Iago in rank. Othello spirals as the lies and levels of manipulation deepen until he ends up killing his wife, Desdemona, and ultimately himself. Macbeth tells the story of a Scottish soldier who is given a prophecy that he will one day be king, and the play follows him as he attempts to fulfill this prophecy while trying to evade those that foresee his downfall. In examining the magnitude of the plays, Macbeth centers on the murder of King Duncan, whereas Othello focuses on his jealousy toward Desdemona, spurred by Iago's manipulation. The subjects of kings, murder, jealousy, and manipulation are real and innately offer a sense of urgency that Aristotle suggests when he uses the term magnitude in his definition. Manipulation is clearly evident in Othello as an element that acts as an inciting action for the rest of the story, returning periodically to propel the narrative when Othello appears to be on the path to recovery. Similarly, jealousy drives all of Othello’s actions from the moment the idea is planted in his mind, which Iago compares to slipping poison into Othello’s ear (a clear reference to Hamlet with similar themes of deceit, reality, and death). Macbeth’s murder of King Duncan serves as the inciting action, and while he initially gets away with the crime, his guilt lingers, and the problems that arise throughout the rest of the story are a direct result of Macbeth becoming king. This is best observed in Macbeth’s line, “Will all great Neptune’s ocean wash this blood/ Clean from my hand? No; this my hand will rather/ The multitudinous seas incarnadine” (Shakespeare II.ii.57-9). Macbeth feels guilt with the blood on his hands but sees moving on as an exercise in futility that only furthers his murderous mindset.

One does not have to fear whether Shakespeare will embellish words or offer flourishes to his text that serve to dramatize the story; however, the question remains of whether the characters are acting more than narrating. In Othello, Iago spends a lot of time discussing his plans and schemes beforehand, but he seems to always follow through, and in some cases, his words and rhetoric serve as an action in themselves, used to manipulate other characters in the story. This is shown in the scene where Othello leaves his trance and immediately says, “Let her rot, and perish, and be damn’d tonight, for she shall not live. No, my heart is turn’d to stone; I strike it, and it hurts my hand” (Shakespeare IV.i.181-83). Othello himself is certainly a man of action, made clear as well by his history as a soldier and hero (treated not too dissimilarly from the heroes of Greek mythology, e.g., Oedipus or Odysseus). This pattern continues during the events of the story, as Othello acts on what he has heard from Iago without having a conversation with his wife. Macbeth is similar in his background as a hero and soldier, but he is portrayed as much more of a speaker than Othello. Macbeth openly discusses his feelings and his desire not to kill Duncan until he is ultimately persuaded to do so by Lady Macbeth. From this point on, there is no doubt that Macbeth is a man of action, as he progressively becomes more ruthless, inconsiderate, and paranoid about those around him. This leads to Macbeth ordering the deaths of Macduff’s children and increasingly relying on the prophecies of the witches. Aristotle’s emphasis on action asserts that plot should be shaped by the actions of the story’s characters, rather than forcing the narrative to advance. This idea relies on strong characters for a story to be built upon.

Aristotle considers four primary factors when writing “Character” for a tragedy: there must be good or virtue, they must conform to social standards, the character should make logical sense as if they were a real person, and the character must be consistent in however the author has written them. Both Macbeth and Othello start out as moral and virtuous men, which is shown in the way they are described by the other characters in their respective stories. Macbeth and Lady Macbeth conform to social standards on the outside (shown in their courteous behavior to King Duncan) only as a means to gain power. Othello conforms to the expectations society has set for him about what a warrior and man should be, as he shows traits of stoicism and becomes controlling and insecure when Desdemona’s loyalty is called into question. Notably, Othello does not meet all of the social standards for a black character of the time period, which are set out by Iago and those who hate Othello. Rather, Othello’s character is barely anything like the imagined Moors of Iago and Roderigo, and Othello is a calm and even-minded man until his manipulation is set into place. Macbeth and Othello meet the roles given to them as heroes of their country, but the social pressures of being “manly” or fitting into the idea of masculinity are what send them on their tragic journey. 

Going further into Aristotle’s tragic hero, Othello and Macbeth must be evaluated on their consistency throughout the story. Othello is shown as a strong man of few words at the beginning of Othello, which is contrasted by his bouts of wrath and jealousy. But by the end of the story, he is still the collected man that he was at the beginning; he is only hurt and saddened now. In contrast, Macbeth is inconsistent throughout his story, but this makes logical sense for his character as his arc is a spiral into madness. Aristotle clarifies in his definition of tragic hero that, “For though the subject of the imitation, who suggested the type, be inconsistent, still he must be consistently inconsistent” (Aristotle XV). Macbeth is hesitant in his decision to murder King Duncan as he still holds onto morality, but by the end of the play, Macbeth is ruthless and paranoid. Throughout the whole play, the logical throughline that Macbeth uses to ultimately kill the king is what he stands by and acts as the driving force for his madness. Some critics of Shakespeare write, “They believe there is a (perceived) problem to be solved and use a symptomatic ‘solution’. They are not aware of the villain or the heroine, they do not see that there is a fundamental solution and they do not realize about their obsession in pursuing the symptomatic ‘solution’” (Dominguez-Rue 679). It is important to consider that Aristotle also states that change is good for the tragic hero: “The change of fortune should be not from bad to good, but, reversely, from good to bad” (Aristotle XIII). Looking at it from this angle, it is clear to see how Othello and Macbeth fit into this definition of tragic hero, as both of them start off their respective plays by receiving a promotion or honor for their noble services, only for the plays to end with them tarnishing their good name and ultimately dying. This is the true essence of a tragic hero that cannot be emphasized enough, which is the change from good fortune to bad fortune throughout the tragic narrative. 

The final part of Aristotle’s definition is the power of pity and fear in the misfortunes of tragic characters. The audience cannot help but feel pity for the players in Othello’s story, such as Othello, whose actions are motivated by misunderstanding and outside manipulation; Desdemona, who is innocent and loyal but unable to reach through to her husband; and Emilia, who is merely a pawn in Iago’s larger game. The fear factor comes in hearing Iago’s plans and knowing what is to come for our hero and his companions, not wanting those plans to come to fruition, and the utter despair in seeing the villain succeed. Similarly, the audience is led to fear for Macbeth and the people around him as his madness worsens and he becomes an increasing danger to the people around him. One writer on the subject of tragedies notes: "The attractiveness of the idea may be linked to our desire for an edifying moral after so much violent action” (Bromwich 132). However, unlike many stories that offer closure or a moral reckoning, Shakespeare's tragedies leave us with no such comfort. The violence and chaos unfold relentlessly, and we are left to confront the tragic consequences without a neat resolution. This is in tandem with the prophecy of the witches, which gives the audience something to fear for the future while seeing the atrocities committed by Macbeth, only to know that the worst is yet to come. As one critic notes, “He acts on a false assumption driven by pride, and he sees his pride strew all around him a waste of desolation in the lives of others, including the life of the one person in the world whom he both loves and fears” (Bromwich 141). One could find pity in the story with the innocent characters who are hurt by the Macbeths’ actions, but pity can also be felt for the Macbeths themselves: Macbeth, whose fall from grace can be chronicled by the audience, and Lady Macbeth, who goes from being a strong (though evil) woman to a woman driven to insanity who ultimately commits suicide.

There is one more element of Aristotle’s tragic hero that has not been discussed yet, which is the fates of moral vs. immoral characters. He argues that a bad ending for a moral character would be too much of an injustice, and similarly, villains cannot have good endings (it would be too much of an injustice) nor a bad ending (which offers no emotional complexity). Rather, Aristotle believes, “There remains, then, the character between these two extremes— that of a man who is not eminently good and just, yet whose misfortune is brought about not by vice or depravity, but by some error or frailty” (Aristotle XIII). It might be easy to believe that Othello and Macbeth are entirely good characters upon first being introduced to them, but the audience is given hints at their more complicated nature that would fit more into this Aristotelian definition. Macbeth is an honored thane of King Duncan who has proven himself valiant in battle, but after receiving the prophecy of his rise to kingship from the witches, he is quick to ponder the idea of killing King Duncan (although in the moment he is horrified with himself for even considering it). Othello is shown in a much more positive light at the beginning of his story, similarly in his military accomplishments, but he is also shown as a good lover, leader, and man of truth. However, through Iago, Othello’s shortcomings come to light, namely his overly trusting nature that lets him fall prey to Iago’s manipulation. While this does not necessarily make Othello a less moral man than previously assumed, it certainly lets him fit into the tragic hero ideal set by Aristotle by showing that there is weakness in Othello’s morality. As one scholar writes, “As is the case with Macbeth, it is not Iago but Othello himself who deliberately murders his love and his wife before dying himself. Iago only encourages him by telling him what he actually wants to believe” (Dominguez-Rue 677). This is an often-ignored element of the tragic hero, which is their ending being driven by a mistake or weakness, not their “vice or depravity.” This is the part of Aristotle’s definition that ties the rest of the tragedy together because it incites the pity and fear that were previously discussed. It evokes pity because the hero is not immoral, and it evokes fear because the audience could see themselves falling for a similar mistake. Othello’s mistake was trusting of a man he considers himself close with, who secretly has malicious intentions, which is a situation that is easy to imagine anyone falling into. A famous writer speaks on the subject by saying, “Nothing dies harder than the desire to think well of oneself. Othello succeeds in turning himself into a pathetic figure, by adopting an aesthetic rather than a moral attitude” (Eliot 40). By focusing on the appearance of his masculinity and honor, Othello loses sight of the moral truth. His need to justify his actions leads him to adopt a twisted sense of righteousness, where the act of murder becomes a way to preserve his self-image. Similarly, Macbeth’s story is a tale of how power and ambition can corrupt one’s mind. Most people can acknowledge that they are not the perfectly moral character that they would want to be, which is why it is so easy for people to see themselves in the same position as the tragic hero. It is easy to imagine becoming the tragic hero in one’s own story.

This is what makes Shakespeare’s tragedies so powerful: they don’t just tell the stories of noble men from another time, they speak to something deeply familiar in all of us. Othello and Macbeth aren’t just cautionary tales; they reflect how pride, ambition, and misplaced trust can lead anyone astray. Seen through Aristotle’s lens, their stories show us that tragedy isn’t about evil or villainy; rather, it’s about the mistakes of ordinary people who happen to hold extraordinary power. As one critic of Shakespeare remarks, “When one is moved to reflect on one’s responses to theatrical action, one is also acquainted with the fact of one’s own existence a fact that is not simply a source of pleasure, but of a shared pleasure” (Witmore 423). Shakespeare’s tragic heroes awaken that shared recognition. The audience feels the fall, but also the weight of how easily it could be theirs. That’s why the Aristotelian tragic hero still resonates today: not because of his greatness, but because of his humanity.
