---
title: "Hamlet's Suicidal Ideations"
date: "2024-12-04"
description: ""
omit_header_text: true
featured_image: 
summary: "A catalog of Hamlet's depressive behaviors and suicidal ideations"
type: 
weight: 2
tags: ["Shakespeare", "essay", "suicide"]
---

# Hamlet’s Suicidal Ideations

Shakespeare’s Hamlet has been a hallmark of discussion in literary circles for centuries. One topic that would be impossible to miss when hearing these discussions would be Hamlet’s relationship with suicide. Hamlet is the titular protagonist of Shakespear’s play, and he is a character who often draws comparisons to an emo, goth, or edgy teen. These comparisons are drawn from Hamlet’s almost entirely all-black clothes, his depressive attitudes, and the play’s most famous soliloquy where he speaks about his desire to commit suicide. In fact, Hamlet’s portrayal as melancholic and brooding has become so iconic that it shapes modern archetypes of the tortured, philosophical character in literature and media. Hamlet has an intense attraction towards the idea of suicide because he is depressed from the death of his father, he is upset by his mother’s marriage, and his depression is only heightened as the events of the play begin to unfold. This leads Hamlet’s depression and suicidal ideations to progress throughout the story and culminate in his famous soliloquy. 

## Stale and Unprofitable

Hamlet first mentions suicide after Queen Gertrude, his mother, and King Claudius, his uncle, lecture him about not leaving for college. After they leave the room, Hamlet remarks, “[If only] that the Everlasting had not fixed/ His canon ‘gainst self-slaughter. O God, God/ How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable/ Seem to me all the uses of this world” (I.ii.131-134). Hamlet is referring to God when he says, “the Everlasting”, and he is saying that he would kill himself if only God had not made suicide a sin. Hamlet explains that he sees no use to keep living because there is simply no reason to. Hamlet explains further that his depression has come from the death of his father only two months before the events of the play, and he also points out the fact that only a month after his father had died did his mother remarry with her ex-husband’s brother. Hamlet finds this marriage sinful and explicitly states, “She married. O, most wicked speed, to post/ With such dexterity to incestuous sheets” (I.ii.156-157). Hamlet sees their marriage as incest because he sees his uncle, Claudius, as too close of a family member to himself for her to marry even though she does not have a direct blood relation. Still, Hamlet harbors resentment toward the married couple, and he spends the entire second half of his soliloquy lamenting about this unholy union, and he concludes by saying, “It is not, nor it cannot come to good/ But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue” (I.ii.158-159). The emphasis that Hamlet puts on this marriage and his final sentence shows how much his mother and uncle’s union occupies space in his mind, which is why it undoubtedly is part of why he is attracted to the idea of committing suicide. This conclusion also underscores Hamlet’s feelings of powerlessness; he must endure this situation without speaking out due to the complex social and political dynamics at play. 

Ophelia offers additional insight into Hamlet’s suicidal motivations when she speaks with her father, Polonius. At this point in the story, Ophelia has been advised to reject Hamlet’s romantic advances because her brother, Laertes, and Polonius believes that Hamlet has malicious intentions. In Act 2, Scene 1, Ophelia informs Polonius of a strange encounter she had with Hamlet where he was dressed and acted like a mad man. There are a lot of possible interpretations for this scene, but one can be that Hamlet was upset by Ophelia’s rejection. Because of this, is possible that Hamlet’s relationship with Ophelia is another reason for his attraction to suicide.  This rejection would add to Hamlet’s growing isolation, as Ophelia is one of the few characters he might have felt he could trust similar to his friends, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, who also work to deceive Hamlet throughout the story. This loss of trust could be further reasoning towards Hamlet’s suicidal attraction as there is deception all around him and it seems like he cannot trust anyone. 

## "To be or not to be"

Hamlet’s most famous soliloquy, and the one most often discussed in relation to his suicidal ideation, is the classic “To be or not to be” soliloquy. This soliloquy takes place near the beginning of Act 3 after Claudius tries to extract information from Hamlet’s friends, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern about Hamlet’s weird behavior. Polonius and Claudius quickly hide themselves and listen in when Hamlet enters and begins to speak. Hamlet says, “By a sleep to say we end/ The heartache, and the thousand natural shocks/ That flesh is heir to! ‘Tis a consummation/ Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep” (III.i.61-64). Hamlet, again, speaks about death as a way to relieve the unending pain and suffering that comes from living, which he points to when speaking of the natural shocks that is innate with flesh. More importantly, he, like most people at the time, thinks of death as sleep. Hamlet continues, “To sleep- perchance to dream: ay, there’s the rub/ For in that sleep of death what dreams may come/ When we have shuffled off this mortal coil/ Must give us pause” (III.i.65-68). Hamlet's "sleep death" must include dreams of afterlife, which in this case would be Hell. 

## Ambiguity

One could argue, however, that Hamlet’s soliloquy might not be referring to himself when he talks about suicide. For context, Hamlet has been putting on a guise of insanity to throw everyone off the scent that Hamlet is conspiring to assassinate the King. Since Polonius and Claudius are listening on Hamlet’s soliloquy, it is entirely possible that Hamlet is aware of their presence and is simply playing up the idea that Hamlet has gone mad. Evidence of this would be how, similarly, information is left out about characters’ plans throughout the story, so it is certainly possible that this soliloquy is part of Hamlet’s plans. However, it is also evident that Hamlet truly does feel suicidal as indicated by his earlier soliloquy and the similar feelings he expresses between both soliloquys shows that he is also feeling depressed in this soliloquy. Furthermore, Hamlet is not good at detecting the presence of hidden listeners as he does not notice Polonius hidden during the conversation with his mother in Act 3, Scene 4 until Polonius gives himself away. From this it seems clear that this soliloquy is evidence of Hamlet’s suicidal ideation and offers further reasoning towards his attraction.  

## Madness

Hamlet’s suicidal ideation transforms as the story progresses. It has already been proven that at the beginning of the play, Hamlet is totally on board with the idea of killing himself, but he cannot go through with it because that would ruin him in the eyes of God. Hamlet’s behaviors and thoughts become less reliable as the story progresses and he puts on an air of madness to trick everyone around him. However, as previously stated, Hamlet does experience genuine suicidal thoughts again in his “To be or not to be” speech. These two soliloquies are expressly different and show Hamlet’s progression throughout the story. In the first soliloquy, it is clear that Hamlet is much more emotional as he starts off talking about suicide, but changes course towards his resentment towards his mother and uncle. This is in stark contrast to Hamlet’s second soliloquy where it seems like Hamlet is in a much darker place. This is evident from the opening lines: “To be or not to be: that is the question:/ Whether ‘tis nobler in the mind to suffer/ The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune/ Or to take arms against a sea of troubles/ And by opposing end them. To die, to sleep” (III.i.56-60). For Hamlet, to be is to suffer. Simply, existing is enough pain for Hamlet to contemplate suicide, and, as previously established, these feelings are genuine. It is not clear what are the exact sources of Hamlet’s suffering, but it can be assumed that Hamlet’s reasoning has not changed drastically from before. Hamlet’s father has died (who Hamlet now knows was murdered by his uncle), Hamlet must now avenge his father, Hamlet’s mother has entered an incestuous bond with his uncle, Hamlet has been rejected by Ophelia, Hamlet is not allowed to go to college, and Hamlet must pretend to be mad to throw everyone else off of his true plans. It seems more than likely that these events culminated between the two soliloquies to further Hamlet’s emotions and send him into a downward spiral. Hamlet himself never mentions suicide again in the story, but it should be noted that Hamlet never goes through with suicide. Rather, Hamlet is killed at the end of the story in a duel between himself and Laertes after the death of Ophelia where both Hamlet and Laertes forgive the other for the crimes they have committed, so that they can both go to Heaven (Hamlet’s only problem with suicide). 

## Conclusion

Hamlet’s suicidal ideations are a large part of his character as they inform his mindset throughout the story and indicate to the audience that there is a real level of madness or unreliability to him. However, it is clear that this attraction towards suicide comes from Hamlet’s depression regarding his father, the marriage of his uncle and mother, the deceptions all around him, and too many reasons to name that pervade the story and only seek to further Hamlet’s suffering. The progression of Hamlet’s suicidal ideation only worsens as the suffering in his life worsens. However, Hamlet’s suicide never comes to fruition because he understands that it goes against the will of God, so his depression only festers. It is clear from all of this why Hamlet is so attracted to suicide.


