---
title: "Defending Pandarus from Troilus and Criseyde"
date: "2025-09-26"
description: ""
omit_header_text: true
featured_image: 
summary: "A defense of Pandarus from Troilus and Criseyde"
type: 
weight: 2
tags: ["essay", "literature", "chivalry", "substantive"]
---

<b>In Defense of Pandarus</b>

Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde is a tragic poem that follows the romance between its two titular characters. One of the most important characters in the story, and the driving force for most of the plot, is the character Pandarus. Most readers have come to associate Pandarus with an ideal figure of treachery and mischief who schemes to achieve his selfish desires. This is an inaccurate understanding, however, because Pandarus, in reality, is an incredible friend and uncle whose only ambitions are to help those around him achieve their goals. Pandarus is a misunderstood figure who is perceived as a malicious, scheming villain, but in reality, he is just trying to look out for his friend’s health and love life.

It has been the consensus among readers and academics that Pandarus is not a moral character. They may argue that Pandarus goes behind people’s backs to bring Troilus and Criseyde together using lies and coercion to get the outcome that he desires. Examples of this include, but are not limited to, him asking Troilus to ride his horse past Criseyde’s house, getting the lords to become enemies of Criseyde’s enemies, and in a specific instance literally feeding lines to Criseyde to impress Troilus as shown here: “Pandare wep as he to water wolde,/ And poked evere his nece new and new” (3.115-16). In this scene, Criseyde is meeting Troilus for the first time when they both go silent, and Pandarus pokes her to get her talking to him again. Some people see moments like these and attribute them to Pandarus forcing this relationship to happen for one reason or another. However, it is impossible to ignore the outcomes of some of these actions, and the individual characteristics of both Troilus and Criseyde (who act like young lovers throughout the story). One instance of this is while Troilus is riding past Criseyde’s palace: “With that he gan hire humbly to saluwe/ With dredful chere, and oft his hewes muwe;/ And up his look debonairly he caste,/ And bekked on Pandare, and forth he paste’” (2.1257-60). It is also worth mentioning that a lot of the “weird” behavior often attributed to Pandarus is another aspect of courtly love, which was simply part of the social structure of society at this time.

In discussing Pandarus’ morality, it is impossible not to mention the enormous elephant in the room: Pandarus’ supposed assault of Criseyde. In a scene following Troilus and Criseyde’s first time having sex with each other, Troilus leaves and Pandarus gets into bed with Criseyde. They chat for a moment before the following line, “Under hire nekke, and at the laste hire kyste./ I passe al that which chargeth nought to seye./ What! God foryaf his deth, and she al so/ Foryaf, and with here uncle gan to pleye” (3.1575-78). To make it clear what is being said here: Pandarus kisses Criseyde under her neck, then the narrator intentionally chooses to change the subject. He then states that God forgave Christ, which only serves to further Pandarus’ guiltiness. This line is the focal point of any discussion that comes up about Pandarus because it comes completely out of nowhere in the story. At no point beforehand is it implied that there is any sort of abusive or sexual relationship between these two. However, it is worth mentioning that earlier in the story when Pandarus first visits Criseyde, Chaucer uses similar language where they “played” (except in that instance it was implied that they were only partying). For the most part, the mainstream view of this scene is entirely speculation, but it is disingenuous not to acknowledge the implications that Chaucer is making here. The only generous view of this scene is that her uncle was genuinely giving her a platonic kiss before Chaucer decided that further detail about their discussion was not necessary, and to go on with the rest of the story. Speaking purely on facts, however, there is no specific evidence pointing to Pandarus’ immorality.

An often ignored factor of Pandarus’ character is that he is a really good friend to Troilus. There are multiple moments where Pandarus shows earnest interest in looking out for his friend and niece. The first time that Pandarus is introduced, the narrator states, “And sey his frend in swich destresse and care:/ ‘Allas,’ quod he, ‘who causeth al this fare’” (1.550-51). Pandarus expresses multiple times throughout the story how invested he is in Troilus’ emotions and, more importantly, how passionate he is about successfully pairing him with Criseyde. Around line 1360, he prays to God for help (and he does so later as well at multiple points), he convinces Deiphebus to get the other lords on Criseyde’s side, and when Troilus and Criseyde first kiss, “Fil Pandarus on knees, and up his eyen/ To heven threw, and held his hondes highe” (3.183-84). This is one of the most genuine moments Pandarus has in the story, and, although slightly comedic, he is thanking the gods for their effort in bringing Troilus and Criseyde together (even though it was mostly his own work).  Pandarus’ friendship cannot be denied in the face of this evidence, and while some implications point to the contrary, these facts still stand.

Another important aspect of this is Pandarus’ ability to pull Troilus out of his debilitating emotional states. When Pandarus is first introduced, he finds Troilus moaning in his chambers, and Troilus is in a state of complete despair as shown in the following lines: “For ay his drede/ Was this, that she som of wight hadde loved so,/ That never of hym she wolde han taken hede” (1.498-500). Troilus has already set up expectations for failure in this relationship, and only when Pandarus gets involved does he come to his senses and start taking action. Pandarus follows this pattern throughout the story of keeping Troilus in check when he gets too emotional, and fairly calling him out for his cowardice or ridiculousness. This attitude culminates at the end of the story when Criseyde leaves Troy, and in Troilus’ final state, where he spends his time despairing and ruminating at a temple, Pandarus states, “‘Whi hastow nat don bisily thi myght/ To chaungen hire that doth the al thi wo?/ Why nyltow lete hire fro thyn herte go’” (4.486-87). This line perfectly encapsulates Pandarus’ attitude towards Troilus throughout the story as someone who focuses on thought and emotion rather than action, while Pandarus continually pushes Troilus to act on his feelings.

Despite Chaucer’s Troilus and Criseyde being an epic romance, there are a lot of nuances with each of the characters, particularly with Pandarus. While many interpretations of his character portray him as a conniving menace, the evidence presented in this essay should help to defend him. In truth, Pandarus was just doing his best to be a good friend and uncle for the people in his life whom he loved. Pandarus, similar to Troilus’ undying devotion to Criseyde, has a powerful devotion to helping and seeing the success of the people in his life who matter to him. In today’s world, where people are becoming more and more disconnected from each other, it seems important to have a few Pandaruses who will always back up their friends.

